.TH GPU-MODEL 1 "July 2026" "gpu-model 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gpu-model \- discover, serve, snapshot, and restore llama.cpp models
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gpu-model
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gpu-model
discovers GGUF model files on disk and manages
.BR llama-server (1)
instances built from llama.cpp. It can load a model into memory as a
persistent background server with a configurable number of parallel
slots, context window, and GPU or CPU placement, list running models,
and snapshot or restore the whole running set from a JSON file.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B list
List all discoverable \fB.gguf\fR files with their on-disk sizes.
Discovery follows Hugging Face cache symlinks and hides secondary
parts of split models.
.TP
.B load \fIname\fR [\fIoptions\fR]
Load a model into memory as a background \fBllama-server\fR. \fIname\fR
may be given with or without the \fB.gguf\fR suffix and is matched
first exactly, then as a case-insensitive substring.
.TP
.B run \fIname\fR [\fIextra\fR]
Start an interactive one-shot chat session with \fBllama-cli\fR.
.TP
.B ps
Show currently loaded models (port, device, slots, context, pid, name).
.TP
.B stop \fIport\fR|\fIname\fR|all
Stop a running model by port, name substring, or all of them.
.TP
.B save \fIfile.json\fR
Write the set of currently loaded models to a JSON file.
.TP
.B restore \fIfile.json\fR
Recreate the models described in a JSON file. Each model is
re-resolved by name, so a restore still works if the underlying path
changed (for example after a Hugging Face snapshot update).
.SH LOAD OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-device gpu|cpu
Placement. \fBgpu\fR uses full GPU offload with flash attention and
q8_0 KV cache; \fBcpu\fR keeps the model on the CPU. Default \fBgpu\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-slots \fIN\fR
Number of parallel slots (context is divided across them). Default 1.
.TP
.B \-\-ctx \fIN\fR
Total context window in tokens. Default 8192.
.TP
.B \-\-port \fIP\fR
Listen port. Default: next free port from 8080.
.TP
.B \-\- \fIextra...\fR
Everything after \fB\-\-\fR is passed straight to \fBllama-server\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/gpu-model/config
System-wide configuration (sourced as shell).
.TP
.I ~/.config/gpu-model/config
Per-user configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/gpu-model/
Instance metadata and server logs.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LLAMA_BIN
Directory containing \fBllama-server\fR and \fBllama-cli\fR.
.TP
.B GPU_MODEL_DIRS
Space-separated list of directories scanned for \fB.gguf\fR files.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
gpu-model list
gpu-model load qwen3-coder --device gpu --slots 4 --ctx 32768
gpu-model load Foundation-Sec-8B-Instruct --device cpu
gpu-model save ~/stacks/dev.json
gpu-model restore ~/stacks/dev.json
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR llama-server (1),
.BR llama-cli (1)
.SH AUTHOR
krassi <krassi@gmail.com>
